---
title: "Weekly Retrospective"
date: 2020-04-22
---

A Weekly Retrospective Meeting is a recurring event which maintains expectations, encourages open communication, and keeps a team on track with their goals. It is a point of iteration where wins can be celebrated, concerns are discussed, and preparations for the future can be made. Retrospectives typically provide a team with feelings of empowerment and preparedness. They also provide opportunities to foster culture, build trust, and sustain a collaborative environment.

A retrospective meeting, or _retro_, typically focuses on the following three questions:

* What went well?
* What can be improved?
* What actions shall we plan next?

The answers to these are recorded. Afterwards, team members can volunteer to handle any actionable items, or a team leader can delegate as needed.

## Retro Structure

Some structure is required to achieve the most value from a retrospective meeting. Since team members need to focus on their contributions to the meeting, it is helpful to designate one person to be the meeting facilitator. Taking notes throughout the meeting provides transparency and insight to the project's course over time. A convenient and recurring time for the meeting must be chosen which allows everyone on the team to fully participate. A format for asking questions is something to be determined as well.

### Facilitator

The person in the facilitator role asks questions, records responses, and keeps discussions focused. Much like a [Daily Stand-up Meeting](2020-05-20-stand-up.md), traverse the list of team members with each question, and record the response. Give each team member the space they need to fully express their thoughts and feelings, while being conscious of the time spent on each question.

To allow full participation from everyone on the team, choose a facilitator that is a member of another team or department. It is very difficult to respond to the questions and also facilitate a retrospective meeting.

### Record Retro Responses for Project Success

Take notes on a screen everyone can see, using a living web document to which all teammates have access. Ensure links to each week's retro document are made available to the team, and anyone who may be interested throughout the company.

I find it most helpful to have a large screen in a meeting room, to which a facilitator can connect a laptop. Team mates can participate most fully when they are able to look at one another, and are not distracted by their own computers or personal screens.

If a retro is occurring remotely, then have the facilitator screen-share the notes, and encourage the team to keep primary focus on the current speaker.

### Choose the Best Time for Your Retro

A retrospective usually occurs at the end of a project sprint, or similar iterable cycle. The end of the week is a straightforward choice. If a team is conducting sprints which last more than one week, it is still helpful for a project's success to provide a space for communicating concerns every week.

Team size and role diversity may complicate the choice of a time where everyone can fully participate. Thursday or Friday afternoon may not be sensible for all teams. I would recommend aiming for the tail ends of the week, using Monday morning when Thursday or Friday afternoons are not available. Settling for a mid-week retro is an acceptable compromise over having no retro at all, if it allows everyone to maximize presence and focus.

### Format for Retro Questions

TODO: dont ask all at once, just ask one question of each team member, then move onto next question as a separate "section"

### Be Inclusive

TODO:
 + EXTRA INCLUDE REMOTE FOLKS WHEN MEETING IS CO-LOCATED
 + FEELS GONNA HAPPEN, EQ IMPORTANT
 + EVERYONE IS VALUEABLE, EVERYONE'S EXPERIENCE IS IMPORTANT FOR PROJECT SUCCESS

## Actionables

TODO: how to facilitate asking about each response to "improved?" and determining actionables to resolve problems.